This is June 23, one, two, three, four.
Say a sentence or two.
Well, this is the second day of summer, and it's the second longest year of the day, but it's three minutes shorter than yesterday.
We're on the West Campus and I have the pleasure and honor of chatting today with Perry Adkisson about his faculty experiences.
Perry, before we start recording your experiences here, would you describe where you grew up, where you went to college?
Summarize your experience before you came to work for A&M.
Well, I grew up
on a small cotton soybean farm in northeast Arkansas in Mississippi County in a community called Hickman.
The local people called it Hickman Bend because it's one of the shortest bends in the Mississippi River.
And our farm was right on the river and near the Missouri line.
I went to high school at a small high school called Armarel, which is
outside of Blyville, which was the county seat for Mississippi County.
And I graduated in 1946 in a large class of six people.
All the boys except I think two of us had already volunteered for the Army in World War II.
Anyway, I went from Arm Rel High School
through the influence of our local county agent named Keith Bilbrey to the University of Arkansas.
And I received a degree from University of Arkansas in 1950 in general agriculture.
And shortly after I
left the university, I had a job teaching vocational ag for a while at Blytheville High School in a veterans program, but the Korean War broke out the summer.
I graduated in the middle of May and then sometimes June and July.
The war broke out and I was drafted the following in the winter and went in the army and
January of or in March, I think, of 1951 and served during the Korean War at most of my service was at Fort Benning, Georgia.
And I was discharged a month early to reenter the University of Arkansas in January of 1953 where I studied for a master's degree in agronomy.
I received my degree in May of 1954 and in the process had become quite interested in entomology.
And eventually applied for graduate school and assistantship at Kansas State University where University of Arkansas, my professors there had sent a lot of students.
And so I went to Kansas State where I did my Ph.D.
and in the latter stages my Ph.D.
I had been
working in the summers as a student checking cotton for insects and then eventually it worked up to the point that I was doing a crop entomology and protection and consulting for a large corporate farm in Arkansas called Elms Planting Company at Pine Bluff.
And I was, of course in the summer I was making good money.
more than I was made in my first job.
But as a result of that experience, the University of Missouri had created a position for a cotton entomologist in the Boot Hill, which you know about.
You know that part of the country.
They were opening up a little field station at Sykeston, Missouri.
So they recruited me.
At first they came and they wanted me to come before I finished my degree, and I said, no, I'm not going to take a job until I finish.
I'm going to finish everything because if I ever take a job, I might never finish.
So they hired somebody else, but something happened.
He didn't work out or something in the process.
That last year of graduate school, this person moved on, so that opening came back open.
So I went to work for the University of Missouri in March 1956.
The day I completed my oral defense of my thesis and turned my thesis in, so I was completed all requirements for the degree.
I got in my car and I drove to Columbia, Missouri and went on the payroll.
and stayed at Columbia for a little bit, but my job was to be in Sykeston, so I moved to Sykeston in the Boot Hill in early 1956.
And then the cotton entomology, the people who work in cotton, they have a
large meeting every January, still do, called the Cotton Research and Mechanization Conference, which is sponsored by the National Cotton Council.
So all the cotton research and extension people get together at meetings.
At that time, every other year, they'd meet in Memphis, Tennessee at the old Peabody Hotel.
So I had gone to that meeting in
In 1955,
because I wanted to work in cotton, and I was still a graduate student, but I went to the meeting as a means to get acquainted and let people know I was looking for a job.
And that did help me with a job in Missouri, but in the process of that, I got acquainted with several people from Texas A&M, because they had a large group of people involved in cotton, as you might expect.
And in 19...
at that Cotton meeting, I was approached by a member of the faculty here named James Berzell, who had just come here about a year earlier from LSU.
He had actually done his degree here, his PhD, but he was from LSU, Louisiana.
And Jim Berzell said that a faculty member here had recently quit
to go with industry and they had an opening, would I be interested?
If so, he would say something to the head department, who was Dr. J.C.
Gaines.
So I said, yeah, I'm at a field station.
It's very, what we can do is going to be very limited and I would certainly be interested in getting on campus.
And I'd never been to Texas A&M, but I knew about them from the Southwest Conference, football and athletics, because Arkansas, University of Arkansas was in the conference.
But anyway, so I, at that meeting, met with Dr. Gaines.
And he said, yeah, we got an opening and I've heard good things about you from people at the University of Arkansas and I've seen you here, heard you make your presentation and all, so I think you'd fit in well with our group if you have an interest.
Would you like to come down and interview?
Well, my wife was like eight months, seven months pregnant.
And I said, well, yeah, I would like to, but I'd have to talk to my wife because she is pregnant.
And our job, we only live about 80 or 90 miles from where we grew up.
And she'd have to be agreeable, but she said, you know, if that's where you need to go for your career, then let's go.
I'm not tied home.
So I said, well, let's get in the car and drive to Texas A&M.
And so I called Dr. Gaines and said, well, we're interested and would like to come down.
And this was getting in the Christmas holidays.
And so shortly after the holiday, early January, Francis and I drove down here.
We stayed at the Sands Hotel, and meantime, University of Missouri had learned that I was coming and made me a counteroffer before I even got an offer, that we want you to stay and we'll match or beat anything A&M to do.
And I said, well, I really didn't want to get in the bidding game, but anyway, it's nice to know you're wanted.
I remember getting up that morning and had an appointment at like 8.30 or something over here.
And I had to find where to go.
And we were staying in the Sands Hotel and I said to Francis, I said, you know, I really like all the people I'm working with at the University of Missouri and they really treated me nice.
I'm just about ready to just get in the car and let's just go home and forget this deal.
So she said, well, if that's what you want to do, but you've driven a long ways, not to even say hello.
So I said, well, you're right.
It wouldn't be courteous or polite to drive this far and then just cancel out.
That wouldn't be the right thing to do.
So I came on over here and within an hour of seeing the facilities and walking around meeting people, I knew that this is where I ought to come if I would get an offer.
So I spent a day and a half here and had the interview with Dr. Lewis, R.D.
Lewis, who was director, dean and director of the experiment station.
And in those days, they didn't have a lot of faculty.
They didn't have any faculty search committees.
Department head pretty much made the decision because he would, I'm sure, talk with some of the senior profs if he was astute department head.
But anyway,
I've made the rounds and Gaines told me, he said, well, I can't make you an offer today because I have to have it approved by Dr. Lewis, but I'll call you in a day or two and as far as I'm concerned, if you want the job, we'd like to have you.
So he said, you need to think about what you want, what, you know.
So he called me in a day or two and made me an offer.
And it was not quite as much as University of Missouri had offered me to stay.
So I said, well, Dr. Gaines, I don't want to get in the bidding business, but the University of Missouri, the people, Dr. Stallman, the department head, knew I was coming and they've called and they've offered me $500 a year more than you've offered A&M.
But I'll tell you what, I'll take the salary that you've offered, but I now have two years experience and I've published
eight or ten papers, so what I want in lieu of $500 is an associate professor.
If you'll give me an associate professor, then it's a deal.
He said, well, I think I can do that.
If you've got 10 papers, you can do it.
We'll do it.
And I said, well, I've got 11 or 12.
So that's my deal.
So I came down here as an associate professor.
And I think it was $8,000 a year.
I can't remember for sure.
But anyway, I had been making more than that in three months at the Helms Planning Company.
But in those days, it was a pretty good salary for a beginning professorship in entomology.
And it was the right decision.
I absolutely made the right decision professionally.
And so you arrived to begin your profession?
I started work here on the first day of February, 1958.
And I was hired about the middle of January.
Oh, so you were, you came quickly.
Yeah, yeah.
Describe the, was it a department then, a separate department?
You ought to know your history.
Entomology department here was created in 1899 when the boll weevil invaded Texas from Mexico in 1892 or three and shortly after that the legislature instructed
Texas A&M University to hire an entomologist to eradicate the boll weevil and appropriated the sum of $5,000.
And that created the department and the first entomologist here was a fellow named Fred Malley.
How do you spell that?
M-A-L-L-E-Y.
And I told people after I was head of the department, we're still trying to eradicate the boll weevil, and our budget's not much bigger than the original $5,000 appropriation, but anyway.
Describe the department when you got here.
How many?
Well, let me see.
I came in 1958, and
The department at that time was pretty small.
It had a fairly, had about as many USDA people in the department as faculty.
It had a core faculty of three or four people who did most of the undergraduate teaching.
And most of the faculty were former students at A&M.
maybe half of them just had a master's degree they were great teachers and they were good people but they weren't highly trained in some cases so the department was pretty much what was in those days called a squirt and spray squirt and count department they were most of the research revolved around testing insecticides it was a time DDT had been on the scene right after World War II when we get a lot of
These new insecticides that people had never seen before that were highly effective and you couldn't, for the first time, really control insects in the field.
So at the time I came, it was a year or so, about a year before I came, the boll weevil became resistant
to chlorinated hydrocarbons, the DDT type classes, not DDT itself because DDT was not effective against the bull weevil, but those kind of materials.
And it created sort of a panic and because people had been getting almost 100% control and all of a sudden you can't control worse pests than cotton.
and we were having a lot of losses.
And as a result of that, Dr. Lewis had been able to get a corporation from the experiment, for the experiment station from the legislature to begin to do basic research on cotton insects.
And one of the position I came into was an existing position, but they switched it around some, and one Brazil came into.
We were both PhDs and we were hired to do basic research on cotton problems to try to find alternative methods for control and so forth.
So we were in a new wave of the different kind of person in the department.
At the same time, the USDA
did the same thing.
They brought in three PhDs to work on the boll weevil problem, and they were people who were trained in a different method from other universities.
And so there was about five of us that were really involved in changing the research direction.
Was there a team leader, anyone who was responsible, was the key head of the cotton research?
No.
We all had our own individual projects and the department head that delineated responsibilities at that time.
As it turned out, I came and my primary responsibility, in fact, was work on the pink bull worm.
and Jim Burzell was to work on other continent insects.
Now, did you pick that, or were you assigned?
No, I was assigned that.
Were you replacing someone?
I was replacing a person named Bill McGee, who had his PhD from here.
His father, in fact, was a professor in the ag-eco department.
And I took over Bill McGee's projects, but within a year or two, we had developed a program that pretty much eliminated the pink bull worm by non-chemical means.
And as a result, I'd worked myself out of a job.
Describe how you did that.
Well, I didn't do it myself, but I was part of a group.
We had several USDA people in Brownsville, but what we did is develop a program based on uniform planning dates and time of planning and assault destruction.
Texas had a law to
mandate stalk destruction and try to get the residue out so you eliminate the overwintering population pretty much.
But nobody had put it into a program.
And at the point when I came, people hadn't evaluated how successful that might be.
So I came at a point that it was sort of putting together a program based primarily on other people's research.
and then evaluate it by some statistical methods that people who were involved had not used before.
Geographically, where did y'all do the field work?
Well, all over, all over Texas.
The peak bollworm was more of a problem in south Texas and out in the El Paso area.
But I did research in El Paso from here and in the Rio Grande Valley and, of course, locally.
When did you begin to realize it was succeeding?
How long?
Oh, within a year.
Within a year, I could see from what we were doing in field plots and large areas that we had a program that would do that.
So in, like, 1959, I wrote a bulletin on it.
integrated control of the pink bullworm.
I guess it was the first integrated control bulletin that was ever well done out of the entomology department here.
And I was doing quite a bit of basic research on the pink bullworm on particularly on the
mechanism which had overwintered, had become dormant.
And insects go into a stage called diapause.
It's a dormant stage which are, they don't require any food or water or, and they're highly resistant to cold.
And so I was doing work on dormancy and on the fact of day length and controlling dormancy, which was, anyway, a new discovery.
And in the process of that work, some of my publications came to the attention of a person at Harvard named Carol Williams.
And Carroll was one of the top two insect physiologists in the world at the time.
He and a person in England named Wigglesworth, Vincent Wigglesworth, were the supreme authorities.
They were two people above everybody.
So my work had come to the attention of Carroll who had done a lot of work on dormancy.
That was his primary area work in fact.
So I gave a paper in Phoenix, Arizona in entomology meetings I think in the fall of 1961 or,
I guess, the fall of 1961, which Carroll attended.
So he came up to me after the meeting and said, introduced himself.
and said, I would like to come back by Texas A&M on the way back to Harvard and visit with you.
Well, he was a hero, you know.
I thought, God, it's like God had come to see you.
And I said, well, you know, you can come to see me anytime you want, but I'll tell you at the beginning, I'll be ashamed for you to see where my lab is.
and where I'm working, but that's all right.
Come on.
But I'll tell you beforehand, I'm working in an old shed, and I don't have facilities anywhere near.
I'm sure I've never been to Harvard like you're used to.
So I was ashamed for him to come and visit because I had built some labs myself with a couple of graduate students and one of these old Quonset buildings that sat right across.
You may remember where they were.
It was one that sat right on the road, highway here by the railroad.
So Carroll came and visited and he said, well, you've got to get out of this kind of facility.
So you need to come to Harvard and spend a year in my lab.
And I said, well, you know, I'd really like to do that, but I don't know that I can.
I don't know.
First thing is A&M, they don't have a sabbatical lead program, and I don't know whether I could do that.
Well, Carol, you had to know him.
He was a very willful, forceful person.
He said, what's your dean's name?
I said, his name, Harry Kunkel.
He said, well, I'm going to call Harry Kunkel and make an appointment to go see him.
And I said, well, that's up to you, you know.
So he did.
He got on the phone and said, this is Professor Carol Williams from Harvard University, and I'm visiting the entomology department, and I want to come talk to you about one of your profs, young profs.
So he went over and talked to her, and he said, I don't know.
He came back and told me, he said, I told your dean that it was
absolutely shameful for a university of this size to have a person of your talent working in such a crappy place.
And I also told him that I had invited you to come and spend a year in my lab and
Bell went longer that Harry called me and said, what's, you know, what's going on here?
And I said, well, Harry, I didn't have, you know, I didn't, I didn't put Carol Williams up to go.
So I told him the story.
I said, you know, I gave this paper and he had been reading some of my stuff and,
He came to hear my paper, and when he came, he said, I'm coming to A&M to visit with you, and if you don't mind, and I'd like to see what you're doing, I'd like to talk to you.
And after we talked, he invited me to come up.
And then he said he was going to go over and talk to you about the condition of my lab and what kind of facilities I have to work in.
And I said, I thought anything might help, because you know damn well I'm working out here in the old Quonset building that,
It's unsafe and not beneficial to your health, and I'm ashamed for people to know that I work in such a place.
But anyway, as a result of that, I...
Harry said, well, we'd be happy before you go.
I think it'd be a good opportunity for you.
We never, as far as I know, had anybody that ever went from at least from the College of Agriculture to Harvard.
And Harry was a person that really appreciated basic research all his career.
So he said, we can give you leave, but we can't pay your salary.
So you'll have to find, said, can Williams get you some kind of postdoctoral or something?
And I, you know, I don't know.
But anyway.
So I called Carol and said, well, I can get leave, but I can't get salary.
And, you know, I'm married and I just bought a house and I've got a new baby and a wife and I just couldn't come unless I have salary support.
So he said, well, we can't provide you any salary or maintenance.
All I can do is provide you a lab place to work, but why don't you apply for a public health service fellowship?
They've got some traineeships and fellowships, and I'll write you a strong letter
So of support.
So I applied and he did.
And as a result of that, I got what was called a senior postdoctoral fellowship that covered my salary, covered my travel, and a small amount for supplement.
As it turned out, after I got there, the experiment station provided me some funding for supplies and equipment.
But anyway,
That was a turning point in my career because one thing was as far as I know, maybe I was the first person that ever went from A&M to do a postdoc.
I was actually a visiting professor at Harvard and it caught attention to Mr. Rudder.
And I remember that the ceremony is where they were given the awards, former student awards in Guyon Hall that Mr. Rudder would give a little speech and he'd talk about faculty accomplishments.
And he made a, one of the accomplishments he mentioned in that was that I was going to Harvard for a year.
And that didn't hurt anything, I guess, because when I got back, in the meantime, when I was at Harvard University of Missouri, made me a hell of an offer to come back.
So I called Harry and I said, Harry,
I'm going to tell you that I didn't come to Harvard to look for another job, but you know I worked at the University of Missouri before I came, and they've called me, Phil Stone has, and said if I would come to Columbia, he would give me a salary of $15,000.
And I said, you know, I'm making $8,000 at A&M, and I found out that I'm an associate professor at A&M, and I'm working in a lab next to a guy here who's doing a postdoc, University of Texas Department of Biology, and he's making $15,000 as an assistant professor.
So I said, you know, that's an offer I have to consider because they're just doubling my salary.
So he said, well,
Barry, don't you take that offer.